---
layout: post
title: My giving in 2017
tags: [effective altruism, donations]
---

In 2017 I made the following donations:
- £5000 to [Charity Science: Health](https://www.charitysciencehealth.com/)
- £5000 to [Wild-animal Suffering Research](https://was-research.org/)

Here's why.

<!-- more -->

# Overall approach

In the past, my approach has been to split my donation between a conservative,
clearly beneficial target, and a more speculative but higher expected-impact
target.

There are a couple of reasons for this:
- Signalling/"keeping my feet on the ground". I find it much easier to convince
  others (any myself) that I actually care about the problems in the world if
  I'm donating a substantial amount of money to tackle them directly, rather
  than just funding organizations run by my friends.
- Ensuring the pyramid scheme pays out. When funding outreach, there is a risk
  that you produce a pyramid scheme style of growth, where you just focus on
  building your capacity. This can go wrong if you never actually convert that
  capacity into productive capacity for some reason (corruption, disaster, etc).
  If at each stage you spend some of the gain in capacity on the direct target
  you avoid this, at the cost of slower growth. (I'm not sure how good a reason
  this is - I hadn't articulated it before now)
  
In previous years my conservative donation has tended to be to the [Against
Malaria Foundation](https://www.againstmalaria.com/) or the [Schistosomiasis
Control Initiative](https://www.imperial.ac.uk/schistosomiasis-control-initiative), and my
adventurous donation has been to the [Centre for Effective
Altruism](https://www.centreforeffectivealtruism.org/), 
since I thought they were in a good position to use the money more wisely than I, and I trust their judgement.

This year, I'm focussing *more* on exploratory options. I'm 
[on record](http://effective-altruism.com/ea/170/ea_should_invest_more_in_exploration/) as
saying that EAs should invest more in exploration, and I'd like to contribute to
a culture of funding early-stage, exploratory ventures. As it happens, I also
happen to know of a couple that qualify.

# Targets

## Charity Science: Health

CSH have done something that I consider to be very difficult: *deliberately*
start a new organization targeting a high-priority area and make it work. I
therefore have a very high opinion of the team, the area they're working in, and
the potential for learning about the process of directed entrepreneurship
(charitable or otherwise). I love it.

CSH is my "conservative" donation, even though it is still quite a
speculative venture. This is because the signalling aspect of my conservatism is
more about method than risk, and I don't need to pay out of the pyramid scheme
since I'm not funding outreach this year.

## Wild-animal Suffering Research

I don't know what I think about wild-animal suffering. I think it *could* be
enormously important, and the research is currently really, embarrassingly,
non-existent. So I think the value of information here is very high. I suspect
that after a year or two the VoI may drop without any plausible interventions
being discovered, in which case I expect I am likely to switch away from this.

I was also very impressed by Persis Eskander's talk at EA Global London (sadly
no video yet, it appears). I had previously thought that the area was almost
certainly intractable, but she convinced me that it was only probably intractable.

## Why not CEA?

CEA has a strong case to be a top-tier donation target. They've been focussing
increasingly on outreach, which is vital for capacity-building in the long run.

However, I've actually become less interested in funding them. This is for two
reasons:
- They are prominent enough that I think they are well-funded. This is mainly
  relevant because I think I have other donation options that are less likely to
  reach their funding goals.
- I am comparatively less excited about more outreach than I was about their
  research and incubation work, which they've scaled down.

The second reason is controversial, and I'm not sure I have a watertight case
for it. I may just be wrong, and outreach *is* the most important thing. But
nonetheless it is one of my actual reasons.

## Why not XRisk?

I also don't really know what I think about XRisk. I'm increasingly concerned
about it, but it's unclear to me where to donate to have the most impact. There
are several organizations that look like they could be good on the margin (MIRI,
ALLFED, etc.).

Again, I may be wrong here and this might be the most important thing.

# Amount

£10000 is substantially over 10% of my income. My current non-systematic
approach is to have a hard floor at 10% and then give more spontaneously if I
feel like it. I had a good year and my savings were higher than expected, so I
decided to just give more.
