---
title: Political philosophy needs moral philosophy
layout: post
date: 2015-08-01
tags: [philosophy, politics]
---

Alfred, Beth, Carl, and Emma are discussing the minimum wage.

Alfred: I think we should institute a minimum wage, because it will improve the
lives of low-paid workers who will then be paid more.

Beth: I think we should not institute a minimum wage, because doing so violates
the rights of workers and employers to agree to free contracts.

Carl: I think we should institute a minimum wage, because it is unjust for
workers to be paid so little in exchange for their labour.

Emma: I think we should not institute a minimum wage, because it will result in
a disemployment effect for workers with low employability.

When it comes to policy, clearly Alfred and Carl can form an alliance, as can
Beth and Emma - they have compatible beliefs about whether we should actually
implement a minimum wage.

On the other hand, they have these beliefs for very different reasons. Alfred
and Emma hold their positions because they believe that the minimum wage will
make people better (respectively, worse) off. Beth and Carl hold their positions
because they believe that the minimum wage is forbidden (respectively, required)
by people's rights. This amounts to a difference in the basic moral philosophy
that our debaters bring to the discussion: Alfred and Emma are making broadly
consequentialist arguments, whereas Beth and Carl are making broadly
deontological arguments.

This means two things. Firstly, the policy-based alliances may not extend to
other policies, because they rely on the participants using different bases of
reasoning to reach the same conclusion. Secondly, there is *much* better
potential for a profitable debate between those who share a base moral
philosophy.

Suppose that Emma tries to persuade Carl that he is mistaken. They both agree
about what they are *trying* to do: maximize the welfare of the population. They
disagree about what effect this particular policy will have on their goal:
Alfred thinks that it will make people generally better off, Emma thinks it will
make them worse off. The debate they need to have is a broadly factual one, and
there's a reasonable chance they'll make progress.

On the other hand, if Emma tries to persuade Carl that he is mistaken, she is
unlikely to have such an easy time. They don't even agree about what they're
*trying* to do. Carl may think that merely improving the welfare of the
population may still be unjust, and so be entirely unmoved by arguments about
whether the minimum wage will make people better off. Similarly, Emma may find
that arguments about the injustice of the situation miss the point - surely it
is still better to make people better off?
 
Emma and Carl's *main* disagreement is about moral philosophy. If they realise
this, then they can try to discuss that instead, but that's an even harder topic
to tackle. If they don't, then they're going to have a fruitless and frustrating
argument, in which they both feel like they're talking past the other
one.[^exaggerate]

[^exaggerate]: I am somewhat exaggerating how little overlap there is in the
    kinds of argument that are acceptable to the broadly consequentialist camp and
    the broadly deontologist camp. Sophisticated consequentialists are likely to
    accept that systems of rights can provide useful Schelling points over the long
    term; and most deontologists will accept that we have a duty to make people
    beter off.

I think this is a real patten in debate. Both sides of the "political
spectrum"[^spectrum] have their consequentialists and their deontologists. To
stereotype wildly: the left's deontologists are the justice warriors, while their
consequentialists are the technocrats. The right's deontologists are the
freedom-loving capitalists, while their consequentialists are the economists.

[^spectrum]: Which is a terribly one-dimensional model - indeed, part of the
    point of this post is to try and point out another dimension.
    
The awareness of this split seems to be highest amonst libertarians, possibly
because it's largely stil an intellectual movement. There there is a particulary
odd divide between those who think that the point is minimizing coercion, and
those who just think that anarcho-capitalism would make everyone better off.


